Michael Shannon: Alright we're recording.
Michael Shannon: i'm going to repeat that mistake so.
Michael Shannon: We are recording welcome back from break everybody.
Michael Shannon: And SCI fi our.
Michael Shannon: Micro services specific service oriented application components.
Michael Shannon: kind of the next generation of what we would call so a years ago.
Michael Shannon: And approach to software development, where the results are small, independent services that communicate using api's.
Michael Shannon: queuing services, the do or api's to do queuing and communication channels notifications so kind of decoupling monolithic applications so with microservices you can use a micro service, obviously in different applications.
Michael Shannon: Obviously, but it also you know feeds into rapid deployment and rapid scalability tightly coupled tightly scoped little diagram they're tightly scope loosely coupled thoroughly modulator and encapsulated.
Michael Shannon: Independent independently deployable.
Michael Shannon: We have a lot of embedded systems that use older APP operating systems specialized APP or systems thin operating systems and often unpatched and older versions of APP of operating systems.
Michael Shannon: Sometimes device drivers are no longer available you bought a specialty embedded system or a programmable logic controller or some sensor from some manufacturer.
Michael Shannon: And then that manufacturer was bought out by some other company and that company simply bought them to get rid of a competitor, and you know no longer have tech support.
Michael Shannon: You can't replace that, but it still works, so if it ain't broke don't fix it, but you don't have patch management you don't have updates or upgrades or security patches.
Michael Shannon: And there is just hundreds of millions of devices all over the world that are.
Michael Shannon: Using IP version for addresses and IP version six with these different types of specialty systems, some of these came from.
Michael Shannon: raspberry pi which was kind of a phenomenon in the UK, and it was a way to teach kids how to do computer programming computer science and then it kind of exploded in popularity one of my favorite shows is a.
Michael Shannon: battle bots.
Michael Shannon: it's it's one of my favorite shows and it's you know where people create robots and they you know destroy each other.
Michael Shannon: I find it very fascinating rather watch machines do that, then people do that, personally, but I just love the different designs well, a lot of those.
Michael Shannon: robots that they create in the battle bots they use specialty embedded operating systems and maybe maybe raspberry pi or others like arduino system on a chip those different variants.
Michael Shannon: This is pretty practical you know we're talking about Linux based operating system, so you know don't use empty passwords avoid any type of auto configuration unnecessary services secure Shell there's a fail to band tool that detects brute forces attacks and blocks them.
Michael Shannon: So raspberry pi system on a chip, you know, regardless of these special components or iot devices or wearables they have a general lack of security, and so this is a area of specialty.
Michael Shannon: Just like skate systems fca da which are you know specialty approaches to securing different types of utility companies.
Michael Shannon: Water processing sewage.
Michael Shannon: That you know the electric grid municipal lights, you know stop lights, and I mean just vitality traffic lighting, I mean terrible traffic lights wind farms solar farms nuclear facilities, the list goes on and on.
Michael Shannon: Those types of facilities have are you know.
Michael Shannon: well known for their specialty embedded devices system on ships sensors real time operating systems.
Michael Shannon: That present vulnerabilities there are organizations like the gic gic has a whole bunch of different.
Michael Shannon: certifications and usually have to go through sands.org to get a gic certification.
Michael Shannon: Sometimes you can not do that not go through a sans.org and you can just try to take the exam but, yet you kind of have to challenge it like you have to apply and say I have this experience and then challenge it and not pay to go to a boot camp for a week.
Michael Shannon: So I did that to get my G SEC there the G SEC is kind of their version of security, plus or SS CP so I didn't want to go pay $7,000 to get that I wanted that certification, so I.
Michael Shannon: Applied challenge did, and I just had to pay for the exam which was still expensive like 1500 dollars or something, but they have the point i'm making is they have like specialty certifications for like skater and embedded systems.
Michael Shannon: it's kind of like storage area networking it's kind of it's a real specialty from an IT standpoint and a security standpoint.
Michael Shannon: We want to if we can we want to test the newer embedded devices, you know in some sandbox environment type to hypervisor or whatever before deploying.
Michael Shannon: The problem is a lot of these legacy embedded devices they're embedded there in use they're in production and we don't really have a substitute.
Michael Shannon: We don't have other vendor solutions and even over the like the last two years that's really reduced our you know our options.
Michael Shannon: A lot of these especially devices aren't necessarily involved in our inventory system, why they should be are changing configuration management.
Michael Shannon: patch management, maybe impossible they're just simply aren't know patch there are no patches or the vendor or the manufacturer is no longer in business.
Michael Shannon: We can use digitally signed code on some newer solution definitely want to do that if we can run these with trusted platform module or with trusted operating systems like se Linux that can be part of trusted computing even better.
Michael Shannon: If you were running specialty devices and at a Google.
Michael Shannon: site, they would be you know adherents zero trust they would need to be running those you know secure platforms and trusted computing.
Michael Shannon: You know, it takes possibly a special skill set with these other specialty systems now, these are the reason, these three are listed is this is one of the objectives.
Michael Shannon: Okay, so don't forget about the multifunction printers you know the biz hubs that kind of do it all, you know, a combination of email, fax scanner printer.
Michael Shannon: It can make Espresso I don't know does everything right.
Michael Shannon: Those are usually on the network and those ports, you know from a layer to security standpoint, we have those specialty devices that are kind of always on that.
Michael Shannon: ethernet port and you know Can somebody unplug that you know biz hub and plug their laptop into it.
Michael Shannon: Hopefully, if you're using dot one X.
Michael Shannon: That particular port is not enabled.
Michael Shannon: To accept a P O l frames so.
Michael Shannon: it's been restricted.
Michael Shannon: So UAE these are unmanned aerial vehicles drones those are security issues, because they can be used against us as a reconnaissance tool for our physical security, but they can be hijacked or hacked as well.
Michael Shannon: advantage adaptive voltage scaling.
Michael Shannon: And they're really know what that is.
Michael Shannon: A closed loop dynamic power minimization method adult you know I haven't dealt with that in years on system boards adjusting the voltage sent to a computer chip.
Michael Shannon: You know, a closed loop system has the ability to self correct, I know that.
Michael Shannon: On most systems, the legacy bios to be ios basic input output system has been replaced, but like I said on legacy components and devices, they may be still running the traditional bios which is vulnerable.
Michael Shannon: you're you're more modern workstations and laptops and PCs and servers are running the.
Michael Shannon: which provides boot integrity better security now, it says offers the ability to protect with a password well, you could have a password on a legacy system border motherboard with a legacy bios that's not necessarily a new thing.
Michael Shannon: But we talked about the hardware root of trust, and this is part of zero trust moving anchoring trustworthiness down to the hardware and depending less on software.
Michael Shannon: security systems on a chip So these are trusted execution environments trusted computing so those modules embedded in a system, a system board a server board.
Michael Shannon: Self encrypting drives its were transparently encrypts without the knowledge or the.
Michael Shannon: interaction of the end user.
Michael Shannon: hardware security module talked about those.
Michael Shannon: So part of zero trust is using those low level tamper resistant security chips to store passwords encryption keys private keys certificates to provide security services.
Michael Shannon: Self encrypting drives will implement F D full disk encryption often like I said, without end user intervention.
Michael Shannon: Providing pre boot authentication possibly with the certificate, it can enhance endpoint security, so this would be something part of like Palo Alto networks next generation endpoint security would involve self encrypting drives.
Michael Shannon: opal.
Michael Shannon: Security subsystem class specifications created by the trusted computing group.
Michael Shannon: high performance computing this may be done in your own data Center.
Michael Shannon: But for sure you're going to be getting access to high performance computing at a cloud provider they're going to offer specialized images they're going to offer more expensive machine images to do high performance computing.
Michael Shannon: I know that aws that I would say all of their data centers maybe not all of them, but the majority of their data centers they have transition to 100 gigabit.
Michael Shannon: So.
Michael Shannon: they're going to offer high performance computing images for doing you know high speed calculations Ai.
Michael Shannon: Those types of things.
Michael Shannon: And one of the vulnerabilities of high performance computing is think about a cluster or distributed high performance computers, if there is a Bot or distributed attack it's going to happen much quicker because it just the speed that these systems operate.
Michael Shannon: They may not, they may run you know specialized hardware stacks so high performance computing.
Michael Shannon: Well, often by the way, run for their storage they'll use what's called a femoral instance store so as opposed to like having a.
Michael Shannon: elastic block store that's just virtualized over the network from a raid array of hard disk or solid state drives this is directly attached at the hypervisor.
Michael Shannon: That the htc blades are running it, so this is the ephemeral storage, so if you were to stop the high performance computing instance.
Michael Shannon: Like stop it or terminated that data would be lost so because of the type of computing that it does it needs those.
Michael Shannon: Directly attached solid state drives to store temporary files log files to do other calculations, with a femoral storage so at a cloud provider, yes, we divide up.
Michael Shannon: Blocker volume storage from object storage, but even within block storage that can be elastic abstracted block storage over the network.
Michael Shannon: or it could be that directly attached ephemeral instance store with the elastic storage, if you have it let's say attached to a Linux red hat Linux server.
Michael Shannon: And you stop or you terminate the server the block storage is elastic and there's a snapshot created of it automatically so you don't lose the data.
Michael Shannon: And since you've been creating snapshots you could something did happen, you could just recreate the volume from the snapshot that happens to be stored in object storage.
Michael Shannon: This effect this a femoral instance store, however, that you might use with a high performance computing instance that's the ephemeral.
Michael Shannon: it's temporary.
Michael Shannon: edge computing the term edge computing really relates to content distribution networking.
Michael Shannon: Okay, now I would say, from the standpoint of a service provider, they would broaden the term edge computing, but I would say, from the standpoint of this exam.
Michael Shannon: Is C squared is going to is going to define edge computing as basically distributing content getting as close to the customer as possible, for example, caching in reddest clusters at.
Michael Shannon: providers broadband providers telecoms, whatever that you have high speed fiber connections with.
Michael Shannon: So your corporate edge is really blurred.
Michael Shannon: that's what is C squared we consider this edge computing I would say that would be broadened by a cloud provider to include it will be called hybrid cloud.
Michael Shannon: And like a diagram right.
for that.
Michael Shannon: So if you're using something like akamai or cloud flare or aws cloud front, there are security mechanisms for sure when you're the one doing the the devops but you're developing the Web application or the content that you're distributing you'll have a node.
Michael Shannon: And that node at the edge location will probably be running a web application firewall.
Michael Shannon: You know, doing the deep packet inspection it's not simply going to say we're only going to allow http https from this prefix to this IP address.
Michael Shannon: But you can use, you know you can restrict certain geographical regions or countries from using your distribution you're gonna you know run this firewall to look for.
Michael Shannon: Cross site scripting variance and injection attacks right the kind of you know, the oh wasp top 10 type stuff.
Michael Shannon: So you'll deploy a wealth there you'll usually have cloud based.
Michael Shannon: distributed denial of service protection.
Michael Shannon: All the API calls to that, from a management standpoint would be digitally signed to mls enabled endpoints you can control.
Michael Shannon: Who can download content for your distribution, but you can also control, who can go through the distribution node to get to the back end content.
Michael Shannon: And if it's cloud flare akamai or cloud front that backend content, the original origin, we call that could be in your data Center it could be at azure blob Google cloud storage.
Michael Shannon: aws s3 or multiple locations.
Michael Shannon: For high availability.
Michael Shannon: So.
Michael Shannon: Next is the transition to physical security now there's not a dedicated physical security, you know.
Michael Shannon: domain it's part of operational security and asset security right, so it kind of bleeds over into a couple of different domains.
Michael Shannon: But this is that third category of control, we have administrative slash managerial controls technical controls and then physical.
Michael Shannon: And the goal is to protect from a wide variety of different man or people made.
Michael Shannon: threat actors, but also natural disasters.
Michael Shannon: And you know pandemics supply system.
Michael Shannon: interruptions socio political threats like we're going through now.
Michael Shannon: And Ukraine and on and on.
Michael Shannon: I already alluded to the fact that.
Michael Shannon: under the umbrella of physical security, we do have primary and secondary loss.
Michael Shannon: You know, probably the number one you know the worst case scenario primary loss loss of life or injury.
Michael Shannon: And like I said it depends on your organization and the way that you handle risk as to you know is that the primary loss.
Michael Shannon: And it can be secondary again cascading.
Michael Shannon: Loss now we typically take a Defense in depth approach when we design our physical security solution.
Michael Shannon: Okay, just like we would have a logical Defense in depth with a series of infrastructure devices right a perimeter edge router and then maybe a honey net.
Michael Shannon: And then maybe behind that a firewall and then maybe ips sensor than a multi layer switch in all of those things in line providing Defense in depth, or a single highly available router or appliance running all the services and the Defense in depth happens.
Michael Shannon: To the order of processing of the data Graham and frame moving through well really the data gram flowing through the device right the data Graham the frame doesn't flow through the device the frame comes to the device.
Michael Shannon: The data Graham goes through the device, and then, whatever the outbound or the egress interface technology is that's where the frame comes in.
Michael Shannon: Right, so when I said the frame to the device know the data ground packet to the device, so we have a Defense in depth approach with physical security and it needs to be methodical.
Michael Shannon: Okay, so you would start at the edge of your facility your property line if that's the case like a at a campus and you would work your way back to your where your most valuable assets are could be a walk in safe.
Michael Shannon: It could be a safe in the CEOs or the president's office in her office, it could be the data Center.
Michael Shannon: But a methodical approach outside in inside out now of course.
Michael Shannon: It depends on you know where you're located you know if you're in a if you're in a business Center and you basically just a single office and you're sharing.
Michael Shannon: with other businesses or you're on a floor of a building and there's multiple businesses Those are all factors, we have to consider, whatever our domain of control is which may be, you know if we're on a floor of a building the locked door that comes into the foyer day.
Michael Shannon: Or the area where the reception is that's our domain regardless outside in or inside out methodical approach, one thing we do have to know is what are all of the.
Michael Shannon: ingress and egress points, and that would be including air ducks any access could Could somebody easily access through a wall if it's just simply you know.
Michael Shannon: it's if the walls between your different offices are just simply like you know particle board stuff.
Michael Shannon: You have to consider that.
Michael Shannon: Any area through the roof.
Michael Shannon: All possible ingress and egress points of the facility, have to be examined.
Michael Shannon: But if we do have a perimeter like a property line perimeter let's say we're going to start there, what kind of barriers are we going to have.
Michael Shannon: You know, sometimes you can just have a man made lake or a pond.
Michael Shannon: And you'll see that, like when you're coming into some large company.
Michael Shannon: And you as you approach their entry you'll see you know ponds, you know, like wow What are those for are they fishing at for lunch they go out to lunch and fishing know they're kind of a moat it's a modern day moat.
Michael Shannon: You can use landscaping hedge rows trees as barriers, combined with your fencing of various types.
Michael Shannon: Do you have the ability to only come one way.
Michael Shannon: With a vehicle.
Michael Shannon: And you can't go back there's a tire shredder, for example, bollards bollards are used too often a temporary bollards can be used like little plastic things that stick up are there, the cones you can use those to just temporarily redirect.
Michael Shannon: pedestrian traffic in on a path you want them to stay on or they can be permanent bollards of different types.
Michael Shannon: and different types of gates with different ratings.
Michael Shannon: So you know, the point is, you need to be aware of the different perimeter barrier types and what's appropriate and what's affordable for your organization, you know, in the US, we separate gates and do like four main classes.
Michael Shannon: So if you add an apartment complex or a you know single family home, you would have like a class one residential gate.
Michael Shannon: You know, as a hook, and you open it up, then you go to you know commercial class to like on a parking garage it would come down at the end of the day, maybe you get to physically bring it down, it may look like just a you know event I be completely.
Michael Shannon: Solid it may be, you can still see through it like a cage all the way up to the kinds of things you would see at prisons and airports and military installations.
Michael Shannon: So obviously you know most organizations, you have a campus or facility, are going to have.
Michael Shannon: Protected fence barriers, which is where they're going to begin on their Defense in depth bollards typically concrete or strong metal high tech bollards, however, can you know be raised and lowered can be mechanical they can also include cameras and sensors of various types.
Michael Shannon: Probably the most the least expensive and most common you know preventative are determined control that is is signage.
Michael Shannon: You definitely if you're going to have a preventative control in the form of an electric fence.
Michael Shannon: you're going to have you're going to combine that with the deterrent control every six to eight feet of a sign saying warning, this is an electric fence like you might see it, a military base or a prison.
Michael Shannon: I live in Texas, and we have a lot of both Okay, a lot of both.
Michael Shannon: Signs window stickers scientists, you can just have.
Michael Shannon: You know.
Michael Shannon: In the in the grass or in different areas.
Michael Shannon: You know, we have banners but those are logical lizard technical controls.
Michael Shannon: So, like a banner that comes up if you try to access a router or a multi layer switch or some corporate edge device and you're trying to you know brute force, maybe a banner comes up saying I know authorized, you know access will be punishable by law or whatever that's a logical banner.
Michael Shannon: But a banner is also signage you know authorized personnel only beware of dog keep out.
Michael Shannon: Armed guard on duty no trespassing all those good things.
Michael Shannon: We have security cameras closed circuit TV, these can be wired or wireless these are, this is an important security control, obviously.
Michael Shannon: It kind of checks off several boxes right it's detective.
Michael Shannon: Primarily detective but just the you know just the fact that the cameras exist, can be a deterrent.
Michael Shannon: You have to be aware of the media that it's writing the video to protection of that the high availability of that.
Michael Shannon: Can that can the system itself be hacked it's on a network is it accessible over the Internet, so you know there's a couple ways to approach this just like.
Michael Shannon: Your cameras work hand in hand with with lighting, you want to eliminate any kind of dead spots your lighting can be internal and or external.
Michael Shannon: It can be continuous something can trip it whether it's something that's trip, but with a timer or through some sensor.
Michael Shannon: It can be, emergency lighting standby lighting and there's different use cases.
Michael Shannon: There we go.
Michael Shannon: sodium vapor is good outdoor lighting VF appear live in a foggy area like San Francisco or San Diego summer on the coast mercury vapor is the kind of lighting, you see, often like city lights or in a stadium.
Michael Shannon: Right.
Michael Shannon: so very important another term to be aware of industrial camouflage.
Michael Shannon: Your cameras your surveillance devices your sensors are often camouflaged there in trees and landscaping elements many times when you're on a.
Michael Shannon: let's say a campus of a of a company like a high tech company and you'll see you know art statues that's not just there for aesthetic reasons, usually that type of statue or artwork or whatever is industrial camouflage.
Michael Shannon: Okay.
Michael Shannon: security guards lots of considerations are they 24 seven right.
Michael Shannon: Every day, all you know, maybe three shifts three eight hour shifts or maybe you just have security guards during business hours or maybe you just have security guards that are there.
Michael Shannon: That are not business hours, maybe you have to share your security guard with other businesses.
Michael Shannon: The guards, maybe if they if they are your guards, or they employees are they contractors do they come from a third party are they licensed are they armed How does that affect.
Michael Shannon: You know, an armed guard that that may affect your insurance your business insurance policy but security guards can do a wide variety of things besides just you know.
Michael Shannon: be a present determined, they can often be at a guard gate at your perimeter and they're looking at credentials they're checking credentials.
Michael Shannon: Maybe they're doing you know when somebody's trying to get into facility you're going to have them pull aside.
Michael Shannon: backup and park over here because it's going to take us 15 or 20 minutes because we're going to go and we're going to do some background we're going to do some you know we're going to run some services against your identity.
Michael Shannon: Maybe you know follow up on some facial recognition technology if you go to interview.
Michael Shannon: You know if you go to interview for a high tech company it's not unlikely that right when you walk in there'll be a security guard and they'll have you, you know.
Michael Shannon: step back and they're going to take a picture of you they're going to collect your identity information right you're the proofing.
Michael Shannon: they'll get two forms of ID and they'll take a picture and let make a temporary badge that you have to wear at all times and then that may give you access, but you may only be able to get access with an escort.
Michael Shannon: But security guards are often involved in those activities but they're also responders.
Michael Shannon: If there's somebody walking around on your floor without a badge on you don't recognize them they're going to come and you're not going to interact with them you're going to call the security guard security team.
Michael Shannon: They may also have to interface with other law enforcement agencies so did you are they are they hired are they contracted or they certified or they licensed armed or unarmed.
Michael Shannon: Are they involved are you involved with the screening and the background check of the security guard.
Michael Shannon: or and or are they involved on doing that for guests.
Michael Shannon: That show up or contractors or temporary workers or whatever or visitors who is going to do the online training of the guards I mentioned robots and robots centuries.
Michael Shannon: This is an older model, but this is just a prototype the Samsung sgr a one a sixth century gun that's used at the Korean dmz.
Michael Shannon: Like I said black mirror kind of stuff.
Michael Shannon: lots of different ways to.
Michael Shannon: detect motion.
Michael Shannon: Okay, very important.
Michael Shannon: Additional control physical control.
Michael Shannon: You know, most of us if we have an alarm system at our business that are home, a lot of us are using similar like electromechanical.
Michael Shannon: Right you've got something on the window or the door and if it's breached that breaking electrical circuit, if you don't put in a code within 30 seconds to a minute the alarms go off.
Michael Shannon: Others will use passive infrared.
Michael Shannon: photo electric or combinations of okay.
Michael Shannon: So whatever you're using to detect the unauthorized intrusion, it is a trigger something.
Michael Shannon: It may send a silent alarm to the security operations Center or the security guard, it may be something that flashes on a display panel, there may be some audible or a combination of lighting, emergency lighting and you know 130 plus decimal Horn or sound or whistle.
Michael Shannon: A text message, it could be sent phone call email you get the idea.
Michael Shannon: It depends so JEREMY what type of digital signature is used with API calls.
Michael Shannon: i'm assuming this is an application programming interface request it depends.
Michael Shannon: Sometimes they'll use just.
Michael Shannon: You know RSA elliptic curve something elliptic curve a digital signature a aws they use a protocol like if you're doing.
Michael Shannon: Like programmatic console access, like the aws console they have they use what's called signature for.
Michael Shannon: that's the protocol that they use to digitally sign the API calls.
Michael Shannon: But it's some type of a symmetric key crypto system using either an access key or a key pair so there's there's different ways to digitally sign the API calls.
Michael Shannon: The most common form of physical security mechanism by far is the lock and again for the exam, it is a preventative mechanism.
Michael Shannon: Okay, we don't want to get we don't want to argue with ourselves it's gonna go with the obvious if they give you some type of scenario, we know that the last can be physical we have various types of physical locks physical locks there's different ways to breach them.
Michael Shannon: We can use PICs, and these are kits you can go you're familiar with what lock picks or raking looks like just go do a Google search a rake is something that you insert all the way to the back of the physical and it kind of you know rakes it.
Michael Shannon: As a as opposed to the PIC that usually uses two components and, of course, as mentioned all physical locks are subject to brute force one degree or another.
Michael Shannon: But I wouldn't get too bogged down, and all the different types of locks Okay, but usually we want to combine and have more than one lock.
Michael Shannon: We would like to use locks that would contribute to a multi multi factor authentication process, so, in addition to just presenting some smart card or token possibly we're going to have a crypto lock or some other biometric sensor.
Michael Shannon: And it really depends upon the data sensitivity, the property whatever is, on the other side of that lock right.
Michael Shannon: So I already kind of talked about this, you know physical security Bay involved, you know personnel controls.
Michael Shannon: guests visitors contractors temporary workers, we always want to consider, as this is an administrative type control but piggybacking and tailgating.
Michael Shannon: Right piggybacking and tailgating where somebody presents their card or their token or their badge they go in the door, and you just follow right behind and without presenting yours.
Michael Shannon: Also part of physical security is power.
Michael Shannon: And usually we want to have more than one power source to our facility, if possible, we like to have redundancy.
Michael Shannon: want we want redundancy in our site to site vpn we want redundancy in our Internet connectivity if we can't we want redundancy and power now that's not always available.
Michael Shannon: in different regions of the world, the electrical power grid maybe very you know monopolistic Okay, so you just don't have even if you have multiple sources.
Michael Shannon: Of let's say who's billing you for electrical or providing your electrical it's still coming from the same grid you're just going through a different broker right.
Michael Shannon: But we have to make sure that we as part of business continuity and continuity of operations, we need the ups right the interoperable power supplies and generators, which I have, I have ups, the ups goes into my generator.
Michael Shannon: So a backup generators.
Michael Shannon: Diesel driven perhaps.
Michael Shannon: blackouts and brownouts or blackouts a complete.
Michael Shannon: interruption of electrical power for a period of time.
Michael Shannon: Now, on the exam once you to remember that, often, yes, the blackout, is something that we want to be able to.
Michael Shannon: protect against.
Michael Shannon: But often a brown out can be more destructive.
Michael Shannon: The intentional or unintentional sag or slump or voltage drop.
Michael Shannon: can actually do more damage than simply we don't have power right now.
Michael Shannon: So we have to have contingencies, and this is, of course, part of.
Michael Shannon: Business continuity environmental controls, you know, fortunately, because of virtualization and the ability to use hypervisor many companies now have been able to.
Michael Shannon: shrink down their server farms and their data centers so we no longer have the same kind of power consumption needs we no longer have the same carbon footprint we don't have the same age VAC needs.
Michael Shannon: But, regardless of the fact that we have been able to condense our data Center down to a much smaller area or a much smaller facility, we still have to contend with.
Michael Shannon: ventilation air conditioning temperature humidity and those types of controls need to be redundant and often the H pack systems and the control system should be on a separate network.
Michael Shannon: They shouldn't be accessible across the local area network, it should be isolated maybe.
Michael Shannon: As part of your security operations Center or maybe you have a facilities department that's a separate department and, of course, you know physical security of all of those different controls, physical and software.
Michael Shannon: You have to be considering, are you dealing with any type of chemicals that are harmful chemical leaks biological leaks those things are part of the environmental controls.
Michael Shannon: You know, historically traditionally in large data centers or server rooms, we would have the hot and cold aisles.
Michael Shannon: Where you had your devices in the racks lined up where the fans were all facing in the same direction.
Michael Shannon: Where the hot air went and then it got maybe moving through a cold aisle to a separate system or a room, but you know, generally speaking, the recommended humidity for the server rooms, or the data centers or whatever you call them 40 to 60% humidity.
Michael Shannon: And then the degrees 72 to.
Michael Shannon: 76 as it that's in Fahrenheit so somebody can convert that to Celsius for me and put that out there.
Michael Shannon: So if.
Michael Shannon: Most of us when we go into a facility and we are using the wired ethernet when we go to the cubicle or the desk that we're at and we plug in our ethernet cable with the R J 45 jack you know into the the port.
Michael Shannon: The the the cable run behind that port is not going directly to a switch.
Michael Shannon: Like right into a switch port, maybe in a small office Home Office in most facilities that cable is a part of a distribution run.
Michael Shannon: And there are distribution frames so it's going to maybe a closet or a room where it's being punched down on a distribution frame and then the cabling continues, whether under the floor through the wall, or the ceiling to either another distribution frame or then finally into the.
Michael Shannon: server room or the wherever the network room or whatever data Center.
Michael Shannon: depends on the size of the building, you may have distribution closets you know per floor or several in a building and then extends to your campus so you have to be.
Michael Shannon: You know that's part of your physical security is securing those cable run areas, maybe cameras other types of sensors.
Michael Shannon: You don't want people malicious insiders or somebody who's conducting a hoax coming in and disrupting that because that distribution frame and wiring can be quite elaborate.
Michael Shannon: The larger your campus the larger your built building now usually this is under the kind of umbrella of the facilities management and the network.
Michael Shannon: Right, the network engineers and operators.
Michael Shannon: But as a security manager, we want to make sure that whatever departments and teams that are responsible for this infrastructure that they're taking the proper.
Michael Shannon: physical security precautions.
Michael Shannon: So i've got several slides here that just talks about controlling physical access, you know we're talking about a strong doors multiple locks maybe no or fewer windows, if you do have windows secure security windows that have metal mesh in them.
Michael Shannon: Biometric multi factor authentication to these areas.
Michael Shannon: Obviously we need to have automatic fire detection and suppression systems i'm going to talk about those here the last slide.
Michael Shannon: An air gap is the physical separation so often, when I mentioned like we want our age fact systems or environmental systems to be on a separate network those would be air gapped possibly and have no connectivity to the Internet or no wi fi management capability.
Michael Shannon: Now, having systems air gapped isn't a you know foolproof solution.
Michael Shannon: Just because it's done on the local area network or has no wi fi access that's really where physical security and personnel security comes in, remember the Stuxnet virus, the famous virus that.
Michael Shannon: I guess everybody knows who did it now.
Michael Shannon: The two countries that were involved, and you know at the Iranian.
Michael Shannon: nuclear facility.
Michael Shannon: It was an air gapped environment, the Stuxnet virus got in on the laptop of a contractor.
Michael Shannon: who came in.
Michael Shannon: So remember Eric yapping certain systems in certain areas, definitely is important but it's again that also emphasizes the need for physical and personal security and a zero trust environment.
Michael Shannon: Constant logging and auditing.
Michael Shannon: Your secure enclosures if you have a clean desk policy, you have a locking desk.
Michael Shannon: Now those those locks on those desks are easily pickle by somebody with.
Michael Shannon: who spends an hour on YouTube, but they also may have you know locking cabinets or whatever.
Michael Shannon: But we're we're talking about you know safes either embedded safes a standalone safe, that is, you know.
Michael Shannon: bolted down into the cement floor reinforced filing cabinets.
Michael Shannon: These may be mandates, by the way of you know you're in the military or government agency or whatever, but the safes that protect those valuables currencies precious metals policy insurance policies bonds stocks cyber currency wallets failsafe passwords.
Michael Shannon: break the glass passwords keys all those good things.
Michael Shannon: In the US, we have the ul the underwriters laboratory, and so they give a specifications and classifications for safes so you know if you're involved in that.
Michael Shannon: As far as physical security goes the example here is that a tool resistant to 30 means it'll take 30 minutes to use a tool and a torch to get through it.
Michael Shannon: So the locking mechanism often me when I have multiple locking mechanisms, possibly a biometric maybe voice recognition an ocular fingerprint the material that's used the weight, whether it's in the wall.
Michael Shannon: doesn't have a relaxing devices that have a time lock on it does it connect to.
Michael Shannon: Does it have the ability to send an alarm system or to law enforcement okay.
Michael Shannon: got to be aware of our media storage facilities, where we store our.
Michael Shannon: database backups whatever media type we're using redundant spares hot spares are hard copies of our documentation right we don't have everything, everything is not digital, we do have some hard copies even microfiche is still used so.
Michael Shannon: Some storage facilities that are storing let's say evidence, so if you're a law enforcement entity and evidence room or an evidence storage may be a different type of facility.
Michael Shannon: For example, it's not going to be like a dry wall it's going to be concrete or brick or whatever.
Michael Shannon: It may have no window access if it has it may only have one way in one way out, if there is a fire door.
Michael Shannon: A fire way out there'll be no the door the on the outside, will have no way to.
Michael Shannon: there'll be no handle whatsoever.
Michael Shannon: it'll just be a smooth door, you can get out an emergency door.
Michael Shannon: But i've seen areas that don't even have only have one way in one way out.
Michael Shannon: So.
Michael Shannon: Also, along the lines you know the destruction and disposition policy, you know the physical destruction will be part of physical security there's a nist.
Michael Shannon: Special publication, you might want to add that to your knowledge base.
Michael Shannon: The guidelines for media sanitation okay.
Michael Shannon: I mentioned evidence storage.
Michael Shannon: And again with evidence storage, it also brings in the administrative control of chain of custody, that we need to be aware of.
Michael Shannon: And evidence storage, maybe if it's the law enforcement type of environment, often we're going to be using some type of digital evidence management or inventory software.
Michael Shannon: Right, this is not like some 1970s COP show where the police officer comes in and he's like there's like a you know, a window with like.
Michael Shannon: Little bars on it it's got a little opening and the guy you know here's my here's the heroin, I found, and then you sign off on and it's all just done with paperwork.
Michael Shannon: No, we have modern digital evidence management software.
Michael Shannon: We have modern solutions and things are being tagged they do with rf ID tags other asset tags right they can be scanned maybe a qr code so we're using much more modern techniques now to maintain that evidence and that chain of custody.
Michael Shannon: I mentioned earlier, that a man trap.
Michael Shannon: To truly be a man trap, the person has to be trapped okay so.
Michael Shannon: The individual gets into this area this enclosed area and the door locks behind them either electronically or mechanically and then the door in front of them, so there is a period of time.
Michael Shannon: and often that there's no piggybacking or tailgating it's one person at a time and then they may be talking through an intercom system or a video camera system, there may be a bullet bullet proof window and they're interfacing with somebody to provide credentials, or whatever.
Michael Shannon: can include once you're in that area can include include some biometric reader along with possible closed circuit TV and security guards.
Michael Shannon: A.
Michael Shannon: Alright, one last thing.
Michael Shannon: And then we'll then we'll finish up for the day but a faraday cages can be built around servers can be built around racks of equipment of your infrastructure of your data Center.
Michael Shannon: And these are to prevent damage from some electromagnetic interference or pulse or solar flare or whatever, so the faraday cage can be built into the actual design of the room, it may be enclosures It may be a bag a faraday bag.
Michael Shannon: I have faraday bags, you can get them.
Michael Shannon: You can buy them online.
Michael Shannon: Like there that these like US military grade of different sizes, so my.
Michael Shannon: Cyber currency wallets there in a faraday bags.
Michael Shannon: and technically, you can take a mobile phone and put it into a faraday bag and put it in your microwave oven and rude and then take it out in the phones and damaged don't test that.
Michael Shannon: But this may be something that, as part of your physical security existing.
Michael Shannon: You know, ongoing usage, or maybe something you're planning for in the future need to consider.
Michael Shannon: yeah Victor says they're testing right now, oh no no don't test that alright so that's it there's a few more slides in here, you can you can when you're doing your study you can read up.
Michael Shannon: You know, like air gap couple of slides on air gap and then fire controls just remember there's three elements there's prevention, detection and suppression.
Michael Shannon: The more we focus on prevention, the less we have to be concerned with detection and suppression right, the more effective the prevention that's going to remove the need for the other two areas, and then you may have to know.
Michael Shannon: types of extinguishers and so that's the last slide of this session with the newer type K flammable liquids unique to cooking extinguished using dry powder okay.
Michael Shannon: So that's it uh yeah wi fi routers yeah I know that yeah people that's arguable.
Michael Shannon: But we won't get into that debate, but it's that's that's true Andrew people do that.
Michael Shannon: Maybe you should do that with your five g phone while you're at it.
Michael Shannon: Alright folks Thank you a lot of great chat today a lot of you guys helping each other out men and women, helping each other out you guys are providing links.
Michael Shannon: you're following up on some of the things you're you know it's all great really love that I encourage it right.
Michael Shannon: we're you know you guys are all in this together we're in this together and to get this CIS SP thing going to give that sort of occasion and then I want to see you in July, for the CCA SP boot camp That being said, i'm going to stop the recording.
Michael Shannon: Have a great.